foreign
[Music]
I have an I'm an MD and I have a PhD at
D Phil in Immunology I'm currently an
associate professor of medicine in the
oncology division at Columbia University
who are some important mentors early in
your career uh so I had two uh three uh
incredibly close early scientific
mentors and then I had mentors later
um the first and the most important uh
was Paul Berg uh this was I was an
undergraduate at Stanford University and
at in my second year I joined Paul
Berg's lab as an undergraduate
um Paul
um was and is
um an incredibly uh influential uh
geneticist one of the pioneers of of
modern genetics
his discoveries Are Legion but when I
had joined Paul's lab this was in
1993-94
we were coming off the end of a very
important series of discoveries which
Paul had played a very crucial role in
and that of course was the capacity to
create recombinant DNA to stitch
together two pieces of DNA a piece from
a virus a peaceful and bacteria piece
from a bacteria piece from a mammal into
one piece of DNA using bacterial enzymes
and had begun to create the recombinant
DNA Revolution
allowing us to basically change genetic
code by stitching together two separate
pieces of DNA which came from different
animals or from different parts of the
genome
this had led as you very well know
to a a series of important ethical
questions because for the first time we
were managing we had managed we had
opened up the capacity to make synthetic
pieces of DNA synthetic piece of genetic
code which were unlike anything found in
nature as I said you could stitch
together a genetic code from a bacterium
and a genetic code from a virus and the
possibilities of being able to
manipulate populate genes was enormous
this led to a a an enormous public
interest but also of public fears around
what had happened and Paul was a central
in creating the silamar conference
and
a conference which addressed uh Silo
Mark II which addressed concerns public
concerns and questions about what to do
now that this technology was has had
become available so Paul's lab when I
joined Paul's lab
I was working
extensively with recombinant DNA and
with new technologies around recombinant
DNA in in my case putting them into
yeast cells and to my own cells to
figure out how to mix and match pieces
of DNA together to make them work in
yeast and mammalian cells so Paul was a
very early mentor and what's interesting
about Paul is Not only was he a mentor
as a scientist but he also opened my
eyes to the potential ethical and
clinical concerns safety concerns
clinical concerns around genetics and
the modification of genes concerns which
will of course Echo over time as we go
along so this is now 1990 394.
my second major early Mentor was at
Oxford where I went to pursue my PhD
my D fill and that was Alan Townsend
um Allen had uh solved an incredibly
important problem in Immunology he'd
helped solve an incredibly important
problem the Immunology with many
colleagues but the problem was
um it's very simply stated which is uh
if you have a a cell that's infected by
a virus and the virus is sitting within
the cell
its DNA or its RNA is inside the cell
how can a T Cell possibly recognize the
infected cell because the contents of
the virus the uh the DNA or the RNA is
sitting inside how can a T Cell
recognize something that it can't see
because the cell the infected cell is uh
visible to the T Cell but only its
outside is visible to the T Cell so it
was a kind of you know how do you scan
the inside of a cell problem and Alan
had solved it partially by making the
discovery that viruses uh sorry that
cells have an uh have an innate
molecular apparatus by which they pick
up the contents uh made by these viral
genes they pick up these contents broken
down pieces of these contents peptides
and display them like molecular tags on
their cell surface it's a very
specialized system to do this a series
of molecular steps that allows
essentially a cell to take its innards
and display them on its surface as if
saying you know this is what I contain
within me and if that can happens to be
from a foreign
Invader like a virus or a micro then the
T cell can sense it and thereby kill the
infected cell so Paul and Alan were very
influential to me for different reasons
Paul because he introduced me to the
ideas
around genetic engineering recombinant
DNA cloning and its potential
applications and the ethical concerns
Allen
um was worked on a problem that was much
more close to a human problem
um why do infections get cleared how
does one obtain immunity and and Alan
really pushed me towards thinking more
about medicine which is where I of
course mainly have my the center of my
work there were two people who came
later
um
one was Connie sepco and I should say
Connie worked very closely with a
geneticist cliffhaven
Connie and Cliff
um uh were both at Harvard I went to
medical school there and they were
interested in develop problems of
development in Connie's case how does
the nervous system develop
um how does the retina develop in
particular
and she was a cell biologist and so from
Connie I learned how to do a technique
that I still use today called lineage
tracing but the questions there were you
know how does a single cell become you
um so it was again you think about this
as a kaleidoscope uh Paul thinking about
recombinant DNA and DNA Alan thinking
about some of the clinical problems of
DNA
of of of of human diseases
Connie and Cliff thinking about how DNA
becomes actualized so you have a long
genome but it's inert without being
actualized into making diverse kinds of
cells and those diverse kinds of cells
have to make a retina they have to make
a brain they have to make your fingers
how does all of this unfold in space and
time
um and so the you know Connie came
Connie I was in Connie's lab and again
took on projects that had to do with
solving this kind of you know how does
the genome become a person an animal an
organ
and finally um I should mention David
scadden
um uh I started working with David Scott
David was a hematologist and he was of
all these people the closest to the
clinic
um he was creating trials David was
involved in uh working very closely with
stem cells uh blood forming stem cells
hematopoic stem cells and that is what
and he had made some fundamental
discoveries about how hematopoietic stem
cells live inside bone marrow
um and so he brought me to problems uh
which were now directly adjacent to
patients you know can we do gene therapy
with uh blood stem cells
um how could we what were the ethical
and safety concerns with those kinds of
therapies how does one actually bring
this to human practice which is where
you know the area that I sit in today
when did you first hear the Human Genome
Project what were your initial thoughts
I heard very much about the Human Genome
Project because it was very richly
discussed in in Paul's lab Paul had been
very closely involved along with many
other people
obviously Jim watts and Wally Gilbert
um
uh John soulston
virtually you know Francis Collins
virtually uh uh this idea had started
coalescing of a kind of Consortium
um as it were of trying to not just
sequence single genes or two genes or
five genes but the entire Human Genome
um so around 93 is when I first even
heard the word Human Genome Project I
was then unaware of the private effort
and the public effort and how these
would intersect and coalesce and compete
so I was very unaware I would say by
about the late 90s was when it was very
clear uh what the project looked like or
was was looking like there was a
widespread newspaper coverage by then
um and by the time I was in Allen's
laboratory it was very much something
that at Oxford very much something that
we spoke about you know just to give you
a sense of of how important it had
already become to us
um these this T Cell problem
um has to do with um
specialized molecules
um uh called in humans labeled with the
word HLA uh human leukocyte antigen or
MHC major histocompatibility complexes
complicated words but really is a set of
genes
um carried in the in in in cells which
allows
um these peptides from viruses to be
presented on the surface of cells this
is a an an incredibly important part of
the genome because it determines whether
your tissue can be transplanted into
mind whether your bone marrow can be
transplanted into mine
but it was also a very tough part of the
genome to sequence for various
structural reasons there's lots of
repeats there's lots of elements in in
in that part of the genome
so it's it's importance to us
um as a solution to be able to scan a
genome and to figure out where these
genes lived
um where they came from in evolution
what they did what functions they had
Etc and how those functions uh to what
extent was was uh encoded or or
determined by where they were located in
the genome all of these questions were
very very relevant to the work we're
doing we were doing and continue to do
um as I thought more and more about bone
marrow transplantation a field that I
would eventually really become the
center of of of what I worked on these
the the genes that allow us to do
transplantation across one from one
human to another for conditions such as
leukemia and other diseases uh became of
crucial importance so the Human Genome
Project was not an abstraction anymore
by the mid 90s it was a reality it was a
necessity we and we needed that
information to try to solve some of the
thorniest problems that we were trying
to solve in in Allen's lab
tell us how you came to write the
Emperor of all maladies
yeah so I came to it I would say a
little bit backwards
um so I'll tell you I'll I'll tell you
the story of the journey that that
unfolded
um uh you know when I was at Stanford I
was in Paul's lab
um and one could say that there was
there were these Echoes of
what it meant what the public discourse
around science meant and it was really
inspired by Paul talking extensively
about a silamar and what it had done to
him as a scientist as a thinker as an
intellectual
um we would have lab meetings sometimes
we would have lab Retreats sometimes we
would so in fact the first lab Retreat
that I went to was at asilamar it turned
out that you know the lab still used
Stanford still used a silamar as its
site so I had this strange and and
wonderful opportunity uh when I went in
1994 I think or 1995 I had a poster as
an undergraduate in the assilimar
retreat but then Marianne Dickman who
had been Paul's assistant research
assistant and really a phenomenal
researcher in her own right
um and Paul uh you know we walked me
through a cinema saying oh you know this
is the building where the the worst
argument broke out around between the
journalists and the uh and and the
scientists here's where we signed you
know this document uh this was where you
know we stayed up all night eating
Chinese food
um you know trying to write uh what
would become one of the central
documents of a silamari There Was You
Know The Graduate students uh were there
here was you know Jim what's his this is
where Jim Watson stood up and said you
know let's do this
Etc so it was a a kind of visual tour as
it were of History
um and echoing in the back of my mind
was you know this story is it's got to
be told somehow the story is so
important so moving so crazy so powerful
um and has such public impact that it
has to be told but I wasn't in a
position to tell it or write it
um so I then went down to Oxford but
this kind of echoed public discourse
around science Echo kept echoing in the
back of my head
um
at Oxford I was a nose to the ground PhD
student you know solving problems trying
to write my thesis
but at the end of when I finished my
thesis again this this kind of old idea
uh that this story this story needs to
be told these stories need to be told uh
more publicly came back to me so when I
came to medical school
um this was in 2000 1990
seven
um I first began to start writing
um and you I started small
um I wrote for the new Republic the New
York Times
um usually smaller things I was learning
medicine learning clinical medicine and
most of these
first ideas were around sort of the life
life the life of a medical student the
life of medicine
um I remember writing a piece about
Resident hours I remember reviewing
um
um books that had to do with with
medicine for the for the for the times
and for the Times magazine
but the idea of writing a 600 page book
hadn't really occurred to me
um I then decided to become an
oncologist
um
and uh started undergoing training as an
oncologist and that's where I sort of
began to think that you know we've
thought about this public discourse uh
I've been thinking about how little and
how how little some things are known and
how important they are
um and so I began to think there should
be a the story should be told and that
was the Inception as I was went through
my fellowship in oncology that was the
Inception of the emperor well nowadays
the first book on cancer and that book
really started out as a journal I was
keeping a journal I would write every
day at the end of rounds at the end of
my day and slowly began to grow and grew
out of a patient's question the patient
asked me you know I was giving a woman a
new trial for chemotherapy and she said
where am I going and and and and what
are we doing
um and it was sort of a kind of a
a cry from the heart you know
desperation but also a philosophical
question you know cancer is was and is
one of the most talked about words in
the English language you can't open a
newspaper without encountering the word
cancer somewhere
um and yet its history was unknown its
story was unknown there was no biography
as it were of cancer and that was the
Inception of the improval analogies
for you what makes cancer such a
fascinating subject
well I think it's not only for me I
think very broadly speaking the public
perceives cancer as an exceptional
disease it is partly because we have
pitted the best of our minds the best
minds of Our Generation against it and
we have
had sobering success
against cancer
um it was for a while it was the second
most feared word in the English language
Aftershock
[Music]
and I don't work on sharks so
the the public fear
of the disease the the the fact that we
had pitted our the most Brilliant Minds
of Our Generation against it the fact
that it had yielded important
um insights
um and certainly treatments and cures
but and yet sort of was unreachable had
remained outside Conquest
um is a it was you know is it is the
essential stories like you know
the man battling the bear story uh it is
it is the man it is humans if there is a
very Primal quality about the about the
the story it is the you know humans
battling the unknown in in a cave
um so I think all of these elements make
it
um one of the most fascinating stories
of the 20th and 21st century
why do you think our progress combating
cancer has been so sobering
well there are many insights
um
um about why the progress has been has
been sobering well first let's identify
the fact that there has been progress
there's no doubt about it
um cancer mortality has fallen about one
person every every year for the last 20
odd years that translates into 20-25
percent decrease in cancer related
mortality
um
first of all there's it's not one
disease but many diseases it's almost a
cliche but um but the idea that you know
you don't have one Magic Bullet solution
to cancer
um has become very clear so some cancers
have become extraordinarily attractable
to prevention and treatment
prevention early detection and treatment
um breast cancer is a good example where
treatment has made an enormous
difference there is certainly early
detection with modest success
and but not a lot of you know there's
some prevention especially these days
now that we know people with genetic
susceptibilities for breast cancer we've
been able to do launch successful
prevention campaigns particularly
focused on people with genes such as
bracko one and bracket two
um on the other hand pancreatic cancer
particularly in its advanced form has
remained doggedly resistant to treatment
so the diversity of cancers is one
reason that has been it's been very
sobering the word Magic Bullet has never
turned out to be either a bullet or
magic and so that's been a very sobering
realization
um and second I think it was very clear
early on that the campaign against
cancer would be a bit like a pyramid the
bottom of the pyramid would be
prevention then there would be early
detection and the top of the pyramid
would be treatment
um
in the last decade or so we made
at first an enormous success in
prevention basically by eliminating
cigarette smoking as a major carcinogen
and then you know Finding uh things uh
finding viruses that cause cancer such
as the human papilloma virus and
creating vaccines against them so these
were very successful efforts
but then in the last 10 odd years I
think to some extent it's been sobering
to realize that the number of chemical
carcinogens with large human impact that
we've been able to remove
as much like cigarette smoking was we
were able to diminish we haven't found
so many
um and so the we have had to really
rethink to some extent how to prevent
cancer
um in a way that that you know had
seemed maybe 20 30 40 years ago perhaps
simpler 20 30 40 years ago one might
have made the argument that there were a
dozen or so common carcinogens
and those and by systematically removing
those dozen or so common carcinogens
cigarette smoking one of them virus
seasoning some of them that we would
make enormous strides against cancer
and that there would be biomarkers
markers of
uh of risk that we could find in people
and we could then use whatever tools
that we had to diminish uh those those
risks both of those have not turned out
what have turned out to be the case but
they've turned out to be much more
sobering than we had imagined in
contrast just to give you a contrast uh
in in coronary disease in heart disease
um both that turned out to be true so
um it turned out that number one that it
was for the most part one disease I
should say all three turned out to be
true for the for the most part it turned
out to be one disease essentially one
disease although people could have
arguments about what the pathophysiology
of the disease essentially one disease
number two is that prevention uh primary
prevention became possible by behavioral
modification dietary modification and
potentially the use of a new series of
drugs to lower cholesterol so primary
prevention became possible and finally
um the the it became very clear that
there were clear biomarkers so
um having a you know having a high level
of a particular form of cholesterol was
a indicated risk and therefore you could
be placed on medicines such as aspirin
and and for instance Lipitor to reduce
the risk hypertension was a risk smoking
was a risk and there were other risks
that were familiar risks family
histories were risks age as a risk and
so forth so you had all sorts of markers
by which you could identify patients
before they had the Frank disease and if
and you could intervene and change the
biology of people before they had the
Frank disease so just to summarize
all three things the fact that it was
largely one disease the fact that it was
uh largely that there were behavioral
and other mechanisms of preventing it
and number three that you could identify
the highest risk patients in in in for
heart disease made that an enormous
clinical success so much so much so that
the mortality from heart disease as you
know has declined up to 70 percent uh if
you have the appropriate access in
contrast as I said the mortality from
cancer has drip drip drip drip dripped
uh slowly frustratingly because it is
just the opposite it is many diseases
um there was aside from some obvious
candidates it was not easy to find
mechanisms of primary prevention and
number three biomarkers of risk aside
from some genetics
um and some other exposures the
biomarkers of risk were few and far
between so exactly what happened in
heart disease in some ways did not
happen in cancer because they're two
fundamentally different illnesses and
that's been some of the frustration and
some extent the challenge of working in
in this field
how have efforts like the cancer genome
Atlas tcga change the fight against
cancer
so in many ways
um so again one could we could divide
this up with this question up
systematically
um first of all one should say that the
tcga was built on top of the Human
Genome Project so the Human Genome
Project provided the template to build
the cancer Genome Project allowing us to
figure out what are the genetic changes
in in cancer cells I should preface this
by saying that this must be known to
it's your audience but at its base
cancer is a genetic disease so and by
genetic disease we mean that cancer
occurs or is caused by mutations in
genes that alter cellular growth
cellular metabolism and allow cells to
grow when they're not supposed to grow
and occasionally don't allow cells to
die when they're supposed to die
these genes further co-opt
mechanisms metabolism they co-opt
growth Pathways such that the cancer
cell grows without control has no longer
the control that normal cells have when
you have a cut in your hand a wound it
heals but you don't grow a new hand
that's because the cells in your hand
have a capacity to grow to fill the
wound and repair the wound but then have
also a capacity to stop growing so that
you still don't have a new hand growing
artifact in cancer these Pathways
because of mutations in genes these
pathways are dysregulated so that now
you have a cell that keeps growing or
cells that keep growing
um but that brings us to the question or
brought us to the question what are
these mutations what are the genes how
many are there is it one in a cancer
cell are they ten are they 20 what is
their diversity within a cancer two
breast cancers do they have the same set
of genes or do they have different sets
of genes what is the diversity across
cancers if you compare breast cancer to
pancreatic cancer what is the diversity
of Cross Cancer so the first thing that
the human that the cancer Genome Project
provided
building on the Human Genome Project was
a answers to these questions
how many genes are mutated in cancers
what are the genes what is the identity
of the genes what is the what is the
relationship between let's say two
breast cancers what is the relationship
between breast cancer and pancreatic
cancer or lung cancer what is the
compendium what is the Encyclopedia of
mutated genes that allow cancers to
behave like cancers that was a major and
very important series of uh discoveries
the second was to ask the question now
that you know these mutated genes can
you use them to understand how to derive
new therapies
um and that has been an ongoing project
that might those might include
molecules like Gleevec or imaginib which
take a particular product of a cancer
Gene called BCR able the protein B
cerebral and basically jams the function
of that protein enabling it to not
function anymore now bcra was discovered
long before the Human Genome Project but
the Human Genome Project put mutations
such as BCR able and others in the
context of the entire human genome so we
began to imagine new forms of therapy
based on our understanding of the
complexity of cancers cancer genomes
and the third was cancer prevention so
and we are this is also an ongoing
effort again based on early efforts to
map genes which eventually would
coalesce into the cancer Genome Project
we began to find genes that increase
susceptibilities for cancer
these are in fact biomarkers the few and
far between that we have the gene bracha
one is one of them Gene the gene bracket
two is one of them the cancer Genome
Project again these were found before
the full compendium was reached but it
put these genes in the context of the
human genome and put the gave us a sense
of
uh really as I said what the complexity
and what the compendium was
the
The Next Step the phase that we're in is
to take all those all that material that
these insights and translate them into
prevention detection and cure and that's
the process that we're undergoing right
now how do we interpret the alterations
in the cancer in cancer genes and
mutations you know a breast cancer could
have
millions of cells but you know could
have 130 mutations
um uh whereas other cancers maybe have
only one or two mutations
how can two mutations Drive the
physiology of a cancer cell what happens
when you have 100 mutations
um how do so so really the cancer Genome
Project building on the Human Genome
Project closed a certain set of
questions how many genes are there what
are their what is their identity what is
the mutations look like but open their
new set of questions which is how do
these genes make cancers abnormal
behavior happen what is the physiology
of cancer
and and now we've gone on to yet another
set of questions now that we've
understood the physiology of cancer
we're asking how is the physiology of
cancer related to the physiology of the
host so
immunotherapy is that third set of
questions so we really think about all
of these as sequential steps
um eventually always asking the same
question which is how do we take
The genome
and use that to understand better ways
of preventing cancer
better ways of detecting cancer early
for instance you know you might find a
way to detect cancer by genes that are
shed in the blood it's a very common
theme uh these days and thereby detect
cancer in its early phases and finally
treatment you know how can we understand
the how the genes make cancer behave
abnormally how can we understand how the
cancer interacts with the hosts cells
again the host genome and the cancer
genome juxtaposed against each other or
interacting with each other through
cells and how can we thereby Drive new
kinds of treatment
do you think of the hgp and tcga as
question generating Enterprises how are
they distinct from other types of
scientific inquiry oh I absolutely think
of the Human Genome Project and the
cancer genome Atlas as a question
generating Enterprise
um you know and I think we would not
have embarked on it uh if it was not a
question generating Enterprise in this
sense it's very different fundamentally
different from things that it's been
compared to so it's been often compared
to the Manhattan Project it's been
compared to the Apollo projects but here
is uh and and I've written about this
extensively it's a fundamentally
different the Manhattan Project was not
a question generating Enterprise it was
an answer generating Enterprise can you
split an atom and cause a bomb Detonator
bomb
that is not a question it is an answer
it raises certain questions but it
doesn't raise
fundamental questions it answers
questions
it is an engineering project
um the moon landing also uh is not a
question generating Enterprise it is an
answer generating Enterprise it it is
driven by when you land on the moon
you've landed on the moon you've done
something concrete uh it shows that you
know if you ask the question can human
beings land on the moon you can say yes
they can uh we did and of course it
generates a small number of questions
the Human Genome Project and the cancer
genome Atlas should not be viewed really
because if they're viewed as the
Manhattan Project and the Apollo project
then the public says well what do we get
out of it
um what are the answers
but really should be seen as template
projects they should be seen as question
generating projects and what we are
seeing out of it is the answers to those
questions the answers to those questions
are can we prevent cancer that the
question is you know what does the Human
Genome Project tell us or the cancer
Genome Project tell us about how to
prevent or treat a cancer so I've tried
very hard in this kind of long discourse
to make
a very simple distinction
between question generating projects and
answer generating projects hypothesis
generating projects and hypothesis
proving projects
the Human Genome Project and the cancer
genome Atlas live very much in the
hypothesis generating arm or the
hypothesis generating
Arena of of the scientific Enterprise
the Manhattan Project and the Apollo
project lie very much closer to the
hypothesis closing aspects of this
Enterprise and of course that's not
absolutely true but for the most part
and and I think it's very important
uh for the public discourse around
science to be able to distinguish these
two things
because if they cannot then you mix up
uh these two ideas and then you ask the
wrong kinds of questions you ask the
question what did I get out of it
right um well you know out of the
Manhattan Project or out of the you know
you got a bomb that some people might
say brought the war to an end
so what do I get out of it that's a very
concrete answer
what do I get out of the Human Genome
Project I would say we'll get a whole
bunch of interesting questions and if
you didn't realize that that was the
purpose
of the Human Genome Project I was one of
the purposes of the Human Genome Project
you as a taxpayer as the public as a
journalist as a writer as a thinker
might feel disappointed you could say
what did I get off it well I got a whole
bunch of questions out of it and you
would say well did I did I pay all this
money to get this effort put these
Brilliant Minds to work to get questions
and you and some people might say that's
that's really disappointing but to me as
a scientist it's fundamentally important
to explain that these are two different
ideas they have different aims
um and once you know if you know that
they have different names all of a
sudden you say that's very interesting I
got a whole series of questions out of
it and those questions when we answer
those questions as we answer those
questions we will find new treatments
for not just diseases like cancer but of
course illnesses in general and
understand the human body in a
fundamentally different way
given that how do you contextualize
personalized medicine
so that has been again that that has put
the question was posed that now that we
have
the capacity to sequence human genomes
how much do we have now the capacity to
personalize medicine for an individual
disease or an individual cancer
um the answer turned out to be uh
somewhat but not very much uh for
certain diseases
um and the answers are still emerging so
what have we learned well we've learned
some very important lessons one we've
learned that
most common human diseases uh
hypertension heart disease breast cancer
um
and others
are the risks for them are not contained
in a single Gene but really in tens of
genes thousands of genes even tens of
thousands of genes
for most common human diseases there are
certainly rarer human diseases whereas
single mutation in a gene will cause the
disease or greatly increase your chance
of having a disease cystic fibrosis is
one of them
the many others sickle cell anemia is
um Huntington's disease uh is yet
another one
um but for common human diseases
um some of which I named we've
discovered that in fact the uh for for
most humans uh the genetics of the
genomics is is quite complicated and
therefore delivering Precision medicine
isn't going to be a first order problem
it isn't going to be a kind of match as
it were a jigsaw puzzle in which the
genome will match in medicine and you'll
put these two things together and all of
a sudden boom you'll get the treatment
for for a particular disease it has
turned out to be more complex so the
question that it asked was is it
possible to use
um genetic information
to go from genes to Medicine in a in a
in a simple Manner and the answer is for
genes where the uh where the genetics is
simple the prediction of risk is simpler
the capacity to diagnose is simpler the
potential to intervene has we've now
begun to see attempts to intervene that
have been successful
but for most human diseases it has
turned out that the genetics or the
genomics is complex
um the match between the genes and the
medicines is not one to one and if we
are still trying to figure out the
extent to which we can match these
complex genetic uh uh susceptibilities
or vulnerabilities to the appropriate
medicine and that has been that's the
answer to the question
how do you define the public and
effectively communicate scientific
inquiry to that public
well I mean I have some fundamental
first of all we I think you never
underestimate the public
these are people who have have
you know it is it is their generosity to
some extent our generosity their
generosity that has sustained this
institute that has sustained the you
know decades-long projects to
investigate and human diseases and to
emancipate us from illness and suffering
so uh and the public as you know however
you define it however broadly you define
it has fundamentally always supported
the mission of the National Institutes
of Health and that there should be a
national health program
so a research program so what does the
public mean well the public is very
broad it has very broad sense you know
you range from people with deep interest
in health literacy to people who have no
interest in healthy literacy access is
complicated educational levels are
complicated socioeconomic levels are
very wide their racial disparities which
are in health so the public is not one
public there are many publics um
how does one speak to that public well
first of all as I said never
underestimate and I think the
fundamental rule is is that one should
be able to communicate the central goals
of a project or any project scientific
project in a way that's understandable
to a
um what I I sort of I would say to a
fifth grader
um not because the public has a fifth
graders intellect but your capacity as a
communicator of science should be so
simple
that
um that someone who is generally able to
speak and understand language in with
some some degree of complexity should be
able to understand why you're doing the
project this was
epitomized by my uh you know by Gary
Gilliland another one of my mentors a
leukemia biologist
um who basically said that if you're a
graduate student and you cannot explain
your project to your grandfather or your
grandmother and in in two sentences or
less and have them figure out why it's
important then you're doing something
wrong
um it's not that you're communicating
wrong there's something wrong with your
project
um it's it is it is too complicated it's
not worth it it's not worthwhile it's
maybe you require simplification you
your brain requires some simplification
it's not that they it's not that is the
recipients of the information have the
problem it's actually The Giver of the
information of the problem and it's not
a communication problem per se it's not
as if you can't it is the problem that
things are muddled in your head
um and and if they're muddled in your
head they'll are they'll be modeled as
you go through what you're doing in the
lab so um and so you you know this
you know this could be this basically it
it it it
turns out to be a mechanism by which you
know your father your mother your fifth
grader uh your family member uh around
Thanksgiving table
um should be able to understand what
you're doing and why you're doing it in
two sentences or three sentences
um they may not get the micro details
they might not get the technical details
but they should be able to understand it
and that's the kind of public you want
to be able to reach
um
never underestimate uh never patronize
never
soften but you should be able to
describe the essential goals of what
you're trying to do
um in a way that's intelligible uh to
someone who understands this the the
basic uh instruments of language
what role do you think scientists should
fill within the public discourse
well they have many roles I mean you
know
they are to some extent the experts so
they have roles to ensure that the
knowledge is this that the correct
knowledge is dispensed and dispersed uh
that false knowledge which is false news
which abounds today is not dispersed and
is contained and is refuted uh and it
can only be refuted as I said with
without using technicalities
technicality is actually the friend of
false knowledge uh technical speakers
the friend of false knowledge uh or
false news because you can hide behind
words you can hide behind technical
words even more than anything else so I
think that I think you know we have a
responsibility
um as I said as as we move along in
various things that we're doing within
the realm of research and health one of
the responsibilities is to be able to
communicate that effectively to refute
false news
um and sometimes the false news might be
a disagreement with another scientist uh
to be able to refute that uh this and do
it in a manner that's civil and based on
evidence science Communications around
science like science itself has to do
with evidence bring evidence and and
create a civil argument around evidence
I mean this seems to have been lost uh
in this last
five years or so but um but that is the
basis and it's been going on in the in
the the discourse in science for
centuries
how did you decide to write the gene in
Intimate history
well at the end of the book on cancer
the the question that's raised at the
end of the book on cancer is cancer
cells are abnormal uh
how does normalcy happen what is
normalcy and by normalcy I don't mean a
kind of um uh you know I don't mean a
kind of moral definition of normalcy I
mean how do cells develop how do we not
have cancer
um what makes our bodies develop and to
some extent I was going through
um my my scientific mentors
um the book on cancer really came out of
my fellowship
um the book on genetics and genomics
went backwards uh to to people like Paul
um and to people like Connie and sepco
and Cliff taben who were asking
fundamental questions not about cancer
but about you know how does what do
genes look like how can we manipulate
them uh how do genes make organisms uh
develop come out become real
um so it was a kind of going backwards
to some extent and it was also motivated
by a very personal story and the history
of mental illness in my family where
there was and still is a suspected
genetic link schizophrenia and bipolar
bipolar disease that has crossed several
Generations in my family where where
there is a a genetic link there
certainly environmental links but there
is a genetic link so that's why it's
called an intimate history
um and
um and so that's how the second book
came to be realized
why is genetic information an important
topic for you
well it's it's it's the idea of of how
essential it is and how private it is
and how personal it is uh it is the most
intimate information we have uh it
belongs to us in a way that no other
really information belongs to us because
it's writ into ourselves it is written
to our
you know we use the word written to DNA
in popular uh as a popular phrase but in
this case it is literally written into
DNA
um I think there's an uh you know a kind
of essentializing quality about it we
find it it's essential to you it is
private to you it belongs to you
um your exposures your environment your
experiences
um somehow are choices that you make
um but the genome is what you're handed
what you're given these ideas go back in
history to people like Rousseau and
other philosophers you know what is the
what is the tabular rasa what is the
table that you begin with what is the
blank slate that you begin with and the
genome your genome is the Slate that you
begin with you begin with it before you
have your first experience before you
make your first choice before you do
your first activity it is uh it is
inside you
um and therefore the level of privacy uh
the level of
uh personhood level of intimacy that you
have associated with it metaphorically
culturally biologically socially uh it
remains exceptional
um and I think that people who've argued
against this very successfully saying
you know your genome doesn't determine
you
um and most people who are thoughtful
about genetics would say yes there's a
component in which genes uh determine
who you are but there are large
interplays between genes and your
environment there's a large interplay
with genes and chance uh you know if you
have an accident and break a leg that is
not a genomic event
but it will it has enormous consequences
for may have enormous consequences for
your life and your fate and your choices
and your decision so to think of human
fate and and human Destiny entirely in
Gene and genetic and genomic terms is
clearly false but also clearly a fallacy
um
but on the other hand to not think of
human Destiny and choice in
um and and future in terms of genomes is
also false
um and so so
part of the education
around the idea of of
what genes do how they work how they
make us how they don't make us
is to draw that line and to understand
that it's genes plus environment plus
chance plus triggers that ultimately
results in human phenotype human
Faith human Destiny human choices Etc
how does the hgp figure into the debates
over genetic determinism
well it was not the human gene I think I
don't think it was a human genome
Project's task to address either the
intimacy or the or or to resolve genetic
determinism
um I think the human genomes task was
Project's task was to sequence the human
genome as we sequence the human genome
we found out what we somewhat knew but
really found out in real terms that
human beings are very similar to each
other genetically but we also contain
differences from each other and these
differences are responsible for
differences between you and me and have
consequences for our bodies have
consequences for illness and have
consequences for our destiny as I said
they're not the only things that have
consequences environment chance fate and
so forth so I don't think it was a human
genomes projects project to
solve or unsolve genetic determinism
genetic determinism existed before the
Human Genome Project and will exist
after the Human Genome Project it is a
part of how humans think of genes the
Human Genome Project Illustrated that we
are very similar to each other and that
there in some ways we have critical
differences between each other
and it basically
allowed us to deepen the discourse about
these similarities and differences
and raise the question as I said it's a
question raising Enterprise raise the
question you know to what extent are we
determined by genes and the answer has
has had been clear for a long time the
answer had been that you know it is it
is a flawed and foolish thing to say
that human Destiny or fate or human
beings are entirely genetically
determined or you know strong genetic
determinism is a flawed idea
a weak genetic determinism is a flawed
idea somewhere in between
uh lies the truth
how should scientists approach ethical
concerns over determinism arising from
social genomic
well the first word is cautiously
um and
um
thoughtfully
and the second idea is again to try to
hold
one's sense of balance uh against this
powerful new wave of genetic determinism
as we associate Snips and other things
with complex socially complex ideas
educational achievement
um
sexual orientation
we are witnessing a kind of revivalist
phase of genetic determinism if you have
these genes you will be that
um
so the first thing that needs to be
addressed is that uh that that is
generally not true as I said there are
exceptions to this case if you have a
mutation in the Huntington's disease
Gene you will likely experience that
disease in your lifetime that is a
powerful form of that is a powerful
genetic determinant in contrast most
complex human traits
have genetic determinants behind them
but are highly modified
uh refracted as it were through the
lenses of environment triggers Johnson
Choice
such that when we communicate these
ideas to the public we have to stand
against this this revivalist buffeting
wind of the new genetic determinism and
the only way to do that is to do that by
tackling the problem head on is to say
that there is
going on right now
and in fact the book that Gene ends here
it makes very clear there is this this
wind that is this this new buffet that
is that is trying to knock off uh really
a sober knowledge about how complex
human traits and destinies and futures
are attained which is a an
intersectional interaction between genes
and environment this was known you know
since dobzyanski's days
um but it is important I think now
especially to stand steadfast against
that buffeted wind and to reinforce this
idea that that no one is saying that
your genes are you and you are your
genes and there's a one-to-one map
between one and the other in rare
circumstances there is one could produce
such a map but for most complex human
traits it's not the case
how can science communicators help us
avoid deterministic Frameworks
well it's to emphasize what we've
learned over you know the last several
decades that as I said before most
complex human traits some exceptions
aside are determined by multiplicities
of genes and multiplicity of genes
interacting with environments chances
triggers choices exposures Etc so in
other words you can't create an
epidemiology of human Destiny just by
reading the human genome in rare cases
you can create some sense of what a
person's future would look like
because those genes the mutations in
those genes are so autonomous so
powerful that they will swerve your fate
but those are rare cases the more most
common cases are not them
what most excites you about the future
of genomic medicine
well so we are working on several
aspects of this I'll tell you the one
thing that's that we are working on that
is very interesting to me I treat
leukemia
and
um it's a disease of it's a cancer of
blood cells and really
um for the kind of leukemia that I treat
acute myeloginism AML we know a lot
about the genome uh we know a lot of
other genetic mutations but
unfortunately we have not been able
really thus far to be able to Target any
of these genetic mutations with drugs
um or match the mutation with the
appropriate kind of drug there's been a
couple of exceptions to that
there's a mutation called flit 3 which
there is a drug for but again the
effectiveness has been pretty limited
and we're using for this disease drugs
that are were made in the 1970s
um
one of the approaches that we've taken
which is a completely novel approach is
to say well what if we instead of
changing so
the
the an amazing capacity in this disease
in AML would be to to be able to
distinguish between the cancer cells and
the normal cells and kill just the
cancer cell and spare the normal cell
but whenever we've tried to do that
we've never found things on the cancer
cell tags markers that were not present
in the normal cell
so we've been stuck in this disease
because every time we try to kill the
cancer cell we kill the normal cells as
well and obviously you can't do that
because you will very soon reach it
reach a threshold and you can't cross
that barrier and we've struggled and
struggled and struggled against this and
then all of a sudden we had this idea
that what if rather than constituting on
the cancer we could use genetic
Technologies to change the normal cells
thereby making the cancer cells unique
in other words we would bioengineer a
tag in a cancer cell which would be
eliminated using genetic techniques such
as crispr from normal cells thereby
creating a cancer specific or cancer
unique Target
we developed this in the laboratory and
we're launching a clinical trial this
would not happen if we didn't have tools
like crispr at our disposal so gene
therapy and crispr and various other
things that are disposal so I'm excited
about the use of these tools to enable
novel forms of medicine which could not
be imagined before these new genetic and
genomic tools were available that's one
the second idea that I'm very interested
in is pre-implantation genetic diagnosis
the idea that you can biopsy
potentially an embryo
and make decisions first of all figure
out whether they're whether it carries
mutations that are that cause serious
genetic diseases or serious diseases and
Choose Or Not choose to implant those
those embryos it's a very ethically
complicated Arena as you can imagine
lots of debate around it and a lot of
questions that have been raised you know
should you know what should parents be
allowed to choose for how much
information should parents be given or
can anyone be given to make that choice
so I'm very interested in that
technology and all its ethical the
debates that follow and the third of
course is using tools such as crispr and
others
synthetic DNA Etc to make alterations in
human cells a particularly in sperm and
egg cells to alter human genomes
potentially for the future
so if you're talking about sperm and egg
cells to make alterations that will be
carried generation after generation and
this is uh again an ethical Minefield
what alterations should we be seeking is
how safe are they can it be done
technically so those are the three
Arenas that I think are most exciting
how can scientists effectively navigate
and communicate these complex ethical
issues
well first of all I want for the first
thing one does is to learn the history
um you know this this idea that we are
coming close or approaching the language
of positive Eugenics first of all you
have to explain what positive Eugenics
is and and what it did and what it was
um you know in the United States not far
away from here it's not we're not
talking about the atrocities of of
killing killings in in in Nazi Germany
we're talking about sterilization of the
sterilization of Carrie Buck we're
talking about forced sterilizations of
women usually in order to prevent
genetic diseases based on very poor
science usually in very poor Public
public understanding
um so that's one thing that to begin the
migration or the or the navigation
across these ethical minefields one
begin one has to talk about history and
why why that history is what what
happened why that happened how did we
let it happen
um and what its consequences were
the second thing I think we we need to
focus on is defining rigid criteria
strong criteria when we are about the
kind of information that we that we are
allowed to manipulate and allowed to
have so for instance information about
diseases where the causal link between
the disease and the gene is very strong
I gave you a couple of examples
Huntington's disease being one of them
um is information that might be valuable
to a parent for uh pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis uh that that
information seems to be seems to lie in
the realm uh where an action could be
justifiably taken in other words you
could choose not to implant an embryo
that carried a mutation which might
cause a lethal neurodegenerative disease
in the future you may choose to but you
may not choose to that choice might be
left to you because no one speaks for
the embryo you as a parent must make
that decision
whereas information about complex traits
where there's chances are you don't
understand the traits there's only a
propensity it is a it is an accepted
part of human diversity
um it is a socially accepted part of
human diversity
um I think that information is not very
useful providing that information it
only causes greater confusion among
people and this is not to take a
paternalistic view of it but but just
but just and say you know you can't have
that information but it should remind us
that having that information and making
a choice about it making a and making an
action on it is not justified because
that action is based on incomplete
information in information is incomplete
it is it is never going to be complete
uh it is the nature of that information
that it is not deterministic
um I think that information should be
limited uh it should be
limited by several mechanisms but but
limited primarily because as a scientist
giving you that information
could not and should not cause you to
make an actionable choice because I
cannot tell you in any manner way or or
scheme the link between that information
and what you hope to achieve with it
which is a a a a a kind of uh
um a certainty about a future destiny
um so so that's another one the third
one is is is the is the simplest of all
and that is that we really limit uh the
information and the choices to diseases
of extraordinary suffering
um that the centerpiece of all of this
and this I'm speaking as a physician
should be suffering um the definition of
suffering our understanding of suffering
who suffers uh because as I said no one
speaks with the embryo
um but but we do have uh an
understanding of suffering what
suffering means um it's a malleable
understanding that it changes over time
um and you might decide that uh that a
particular form of suffering isn't
meaningful to you
um you know uh
for a community of of people
um with different stature short statured
people might decide that it is not a
form of suffering
um that
um and that in fact there is a kind of
uh there is a a malignant
patronism to defining that as a kind of
suffering
um so I think the way to navigate these
fields are these the things that I told
you about number one is to have a very
public conversation about the definition
of what extraordinary suffering is
number two to understand the history of
uh of positive Eugenics and the
closeness that we've had to it
historically in this country and number
three to be particularly cautious about
information where the genetic where
genetic determinism is weak but is
likely to be interpreted as strong
um and so I think these are early steps
I talk about them in the book I call
this a triangle
um I think you know maintaining yourself
within the triangle extraordinary
suffering strong causal link between
Gene and disease and no other
justifiable alternative
um is a is a is a triangle that is
kind of a safe Zone
and of course this is superposed on on
the history of positive Eugenics you can
if you depart that zone if you begin to
intervene uh on something that we don't
consider extraordinary suffering whether
whether whether where the questions
about extorted suffering are not
resolved
are very much still in in the public
realm and debate we begin to depart from
from this triangle
[Music]
oh